

===== PAGE 1 =====
SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT 
 
  
  
  
Risk Management for PUIS (President University Information 
System) Using OCTAVE Allegro Method 
Wilbert Leonard Harriman1, Shafa Nabilah Rizqullah Famahira2, Nailha Sakhila Dewi3, Songjie Li4 
1Study Program of Informatics, Faculty of Computer Science, President University, Kab. Bekasi, Indonesia, email: wilbert.harriman@student.president.ac.id 
2Study Program of Informatics, Faculty of Computer Science , President University, Kab. Bekasi, Indonesia, email: shafa.famahira@student.president.ac.id 
3Study Program of Informatics, Faculty of Computer Science , President University, Kab. Bekasi, Indonesia, email: nailha.dewi@student.president.ac.id 
4Study Program of Informatics, Faculty of Computer Science , President University, Kab. Bekasi, Indonesia, email: songjie.li@student.president.ac.id 
Corresponding  Author: Wilbert Leonard Harriman 
ABSTRACT — An information system (IS) is a system that provides information within the organization users. Inside an 
information system lies important credentials of its users to be utilized for its organization productivity. This being said, it must be 
noted that a good information system is also equipped with good security measurement. Without proper management and good care 
within its system, the system is vulnerable and susceptibl e to certain cyberattacks in the future.  In the mentioned scenario, risk 
management must be conducted to ensure such flaws don’t exist within the system. It is an essential and important part of any well-
functioning information system. This tool helps the organization to identify assets to be secured from potential attacks and identify 
such attacks in the early stages before it happens in the future. There are several tools available—including its holistic framework—
to ensure risk assessment can be carried out properly in the organization. The goal of this report is to assess the security level within 
President University Information System (PUIS), enlist all of its important assets, describe its assets, and identify possible threats—
including its risk level—by validating the usage of Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE) 
Allegro risk assessment methodology. OCTAVE Allegro is a streamlined risk assessment method created by Carnegie Mellon 
University’s Software Engineering  Institute. OCTAVE Allegro provides its assessor a robust framework on how to protect 
important assets within an organization and anticipate potential future threats that may occur. In addition, OCTAVE Allegro i s 
relatively easy to use by assessor as its frameworks are readily available to be accessed on the internet.   
 
 
KEYWORDS — OCTAVE Allegro, PUIS, Risk Management. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
An information system (IS) risk assessment is the formal 
process that enables IS risks to be identified and mitigated.  The 
risk assessment is designed to identify IS assets and to provide 
vulnerability and threat descriptions, an approach for classifying 
risks, and a risk mitigation plan. (Keating, 2014).   There are 
several risk assessment tools used worldwide, one of them 
includes Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability 
Evaluation (OCTAVE) Allegro.  
According to the official OCTAVE Allegro document, 
OCTAVE Allegro main goals are to develop qualitative risk 
evaluation criteria that describe the organization’s operational 
risk tolerances, identify assets that are important to the mission 
of the organization, identify vulnerabilities and threats to those 
assets, and determine and evaluate the potential consequences to 
the organization if threats are realized. The approach being 
introduced in this technical report is designed to allow holistic 
assessment o f an organization’s operational risk environment 
with the goal of producing more robust results without the need 
for broad and complex risk assessment knowledge. 
 President University Information System (PUIS) is an 
online IS platform built by President University’s software 
engineers to provide ease of connection between its university 
residence—including the students, lecturers, and staff. PUIS —
as the majority inf ormation system does —consists of a vast 
amount of important credentials within its system, this includes 
the students’ records, billing information, and backup data.  
 Information system security is expected to have played 
a role in safeguarding the organization assets. It is noted that the 
security must be holistic in order to do its intended work. This 
report will be assessing PUIS using OCTAVE Allegro method 
to assess the security in a holistic manner using steps provided 
in OCTAVE Allegro framework, such as Establish Driver, 
Profile Assets, Identify Threats, and Identify and Mitigate, as 
presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. OCTAVE Allegro Roadmap 
 
II. METHODOLOGY 
The OCTAVE Allegro methodology consists of four overall 
phases that will be further subdivided into eight steps. The 
OCTAVE Allegro Documentation provided us with a clear 
framework about each step on each mentioned phase, as shown 
in Figure 1.  
The first phase is to establish driver. The drivers are used as 
reference for risk measurement criteria as initial step. Using this 
initial framework, an organization may have a clear view on 
impact areas are the most significant to its mission and business 
objectives. The OCTAVE Allegro method provides a standard 



===== PAGE 2 =====
 SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT 
 
 
set of worksheet templates to create these criteria in several 
impact areas and then to prioritize them (Caralli et al., 2007). 
The second phase is to profile assets. This step is divided into 
two steps, which are developing asset profiles and identifying 
asset containers. Asset profiles development must include the 
essence of the asset and description of its features’ uniqueness, 
characteristics, and value. The definition must be non -
ambiguously defined to provide information about the 
importance of the asset. Asset containers include physical, 
electronic, and human containers. It is noted that information 
assets reside not only in  containers within an organization’s 
boundaries but they also often reside in containers that are not 
in the direct control of the organization (Caralli et al., 2007).  
The third phase is to identify threats. This step is further 
divided into two steps, which are identifying areas of concern 
and identifying threat scenarios. Identifying areas of concern 
include the way assessors brainstorm ideas to provide 
hypothetical sc enarios and conditions that may threaten an 
organization's assets and their respective devastating outcomes. 
Threat scenario is a framework that gives detailed chronological 
order of a functional and hypothetical threat scenario by creating 
a certain motiv ation-driven relationship between threat actors 
and assets.  The areas of concern captured in the previous step 
are expanded into threat scenarios that further detail the 
properties of a threat (Caralli et al., 2007).  
The fourth phase is to identify and mitigate risks. This phase 
is further divided into three steps, which are identifying risks, 
analyzing risks, and selecting mitigation approaches. Identifying 
risks include how we complete the picture made in the previous 
step, giving the undesirable consequences of the threat, if it 
exists.  Analyzing risks include how we quantify threats 
described in the previous steps. The score given is relative to the 
assessor needs by analyzing the likelihood and impact of the 
threat. After previous steps being done, an organization may 
choose certain mitigation routes that consider the value of the 
assets being protected, the containers, and the organization 
(Caralli et al., 2007). 
 We analyze the whole eight steps to conduct a risk 
mitigation plan outlining necessary measures to enhance the 
security level of the PUIS by referring to the provided Allegro 
Worksheet framework. 
2.1 Step 1 (Define Risk Measurement Criteria) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



===== PAGE 3 =====
SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT 
 
  
  
  
 
2.2 Step 2 (Develop Information Asset Profile) 
 
Allegro 
Worksheet 8 
Critical Information Asset Profile 
Critical Asset Rationale for 
Selection 
Description 
Database 
Academic  
The Academic 
Database was 
chosen as a critical 
asset because it is 
the center of all 
student academic 
activities. All of 
these processes are 
important until the 
student's 
graduation. If 
something goes 
wrong, or the 
system is 
inaccessible, it can 
affect the reputation 
of the institution. 
Academic 
database A 
collection of data 
that stores all 
information 
related to the 
student's 
academic 
process. This 
data is very 
important to be 
used by students, 
lecturers, and 
academics. And 
this system is the 
main source of 
academic 
information in 
PUIS (President 
University 
Information 
System) 
Owner 
IT Unit and Academic Bureau 
Security Requirements 
Confidentiality Only authorized 
personnel can view 
this information 
asset, as follows: 
Only President 
University 
students, 
President 
University 
lecturers, 
academic 
departments, and 
the PUIS 
(President 
University 
Information 
System) admin 
system can view 
data on grades, 
GPAs, or data 
related to 
lectures at 
President 
University. And 
of course it 
cannot be 
accessed by 
outsiders. 
Integrity Only authorized 
personnel can 
modify this 
information asset, 
as follows: 
Changes to 
academic data 
such as grades, 
GPA, graduation 
status and data 
related to 
lectures may 
only be made by 
the teaching 
lecturer at 
President 
University or the 
academic 
department 
officially.  
Availability This asset must be 
available for these 
personnel to do 
their jobs, as 
follows: 
Especially 
during the 
enrollment 
system process, 
grade input, 
GPA result 
announcement 
Announcement 
of graduation 
results 
This asset must be 
available for 18-24 
hours, 
7 days/weeks ,52 
weeks/year 
 
Others This asset has 
special regulatory 
compliance 
protection 
requirements, as 
follows: 
Academic Data 
is included in 
data that cannot 
be misused and 
must meet 
personal data 
protection 
standards in 
accordance with 
data protection 
regulations in 
Indonesia 
(Personal Data 
Protection Law) 
Most Important Security Requirement 
   
Confidentiality 
 
Integrity 
 
Availability 
 
Other 



===== PAGE 4 =====
 SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Step 3 (Identify Information Asset Containers) 
 
Allegro 
Worksheet 9a 
INFORMATION ASSET RISK 
ENVIRONMENT MAP (TECHNICAL) 
INTERNAL 
CONTAINER DESCRIPTION OWNER(S) 
1. PUIS Servers and Databases 
(hosting user, academic, financial 
data) 
Software 
Development  
(Soft-Dev) 
2. PUIS Web Portals and User 
Interfaces 
Software 
Development  
(Soft-Dev) 
3. Backup Storage Systems (on-site 
and off-site backups) 
Software 
Development  
(Soft-Dev) 
4. Credential Management Systems 
(authentication data) 
Software 
Development  
(Soft-Dev) 
                                                                             
EXTERNAL  
 
CONTAINER DESCRIPTION OWNER(S) 
1. Internet Service Providers (network 
access to PUIS) 
 
 
External ISPs 
2. Cloud or Third-party Hosting 
Services (if any used for backup or 
services) 
 
External Vendors 
(if applicable) 
 
 
Allegro 
Worksheet 9b 
INFORMATION ASSET RISK 
ENVIRONMENT MAP (PHYSICAL) 
INTERNAL 
CONTAINER DESCRIPTION OWNER(S) 
1. PUIS Data Center / Server Room 
(physical servers) 
 
 
IT and Hardware 
Development 
2. Backup Storage Facilities (physical 
media, tapes, drives) 
 
 
IT and Hardware 
Development 
3. Office Locations where PUIS staff 
operate (Building A, 2nd Floor) 
 
 
IT and Hardware 
Development 
                                                                            
EXTERNAL 
 
CONTAINER DESCRIPTION OWNER(S) 
1. External Data Centers or Cloud 
Storage Facilities (if used) 
 
 
External Vendors 
2. Network Infrastructure outside 
campus (ISP facilities) 
 
 
External ISPs 
 
 
Allegro  
Worksheet 9c 
INFORMATION ASSET RISK 
ENVIRONMENT MAP (PEOPLE) 
INTERNAL PERSONNEL 
NAME OR ROLE/RESPONSIBILITY DEPARTMENT OR 
UNIT 
1. PUIS Software Development Team 
 
 
Software 
Development  
(Soft-Dev) 
2. IT Support and Maintenance Staff 
 
 
IT and Hardware 
Development 
3. Academic Bureau Staff (manage 
academic data) 
 
Academic Bureau 
4. Finance & Accounting Staff 
(manage financial data) 
 
Finance & 
Accounting 
                                                                         
EXTERNAL PERSONNEL 
 
CONTRACTOR, VENDOR, ETC. ORGANIZATION 
1. Internet Service Providers (network 
access) 
 
External ISPs 
2. Third-party Vendors (cloud 
services, backup providers) 
 
External Vendors 



===== PAGE 5 =====
SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT 
 
  
  
  
2.4 Step 4-8 (Identify Areas of Concern, Determine Threat 
Scenarios, Identify Risks, Analyze Risks, Select Mitigation 
Approach) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



===== PAGE 6 =====
 SECURITY RISK MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
It is noted from the asset-listing step for PUIS that the assets 
included are academic database and payment history (Student 
Financial History). These are important in a university 
information system as they are the one that provide support for 
the university in a digital environment. They may be susceptible 
to certain threats that are caused internally or externally.  
 In order to protect the assets mentioned above, it is 
imperative to note that the containers of these assets must be 
protected primarily. OCTAVE Allegro provided us with a 
framework to enlist these containers, which include human, 
technical, and physical c ontainers. These materials are used to 
derive mitigation measurements to prevent any disruption in 
case of undesirable situations. 
For the authors, these steps are holistic and crucial for each 
of it as it provides the assessors the broad mapping of the assets 
(with its description), the containers of the assets (including the 
internal and external owner), any potential threats that m ay 
target these assets and containers (including its vector), and 
mitigation for each asset. This includes risk assessment on its 
own to view individual risk for each hypothetical threat scenario 
that may happen to a certain asset and what to prioritize in the 
case of the university environment’s needs. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Using OCTAVE Allegro methods for risk assessment 
towards the President University Information System, 
generating 2 main assets with each of their area of concerns, 
where each asset is made mitigation plan as action by 
considering the hypothetical threats a nd risk score.  Mitigation 
measures have been determined for each asset and summarized 
into 10 statements  
REFERENCES 
[1] Suroso, J. S., & Fakhrozi, M. A. (2018). Assessment of information 
system risk management with octave allegro at education institutions. 
Procedia Computer Science, 135, 202 -213. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050918314558/
pdf?md5=de063882bbee6c14e19c8d978f360d04&pid=1-s2.0-
S1877050918314558-main.pdf 
[2] Keating, C. G. (2014). Validating the octave allegro information systems 
risk assessment methodology: a case study. Nova Southeastern University. 
https://media.proquest.com/media/hms/ORIG/2/3m3hI?_s=7Bqu7fWpP
%2BGhI5ciquieitRJJCk%3D  
[3] Caralli, R., Stevens, J., Young, L., & Wilson, W. (2007). Introducing 
OCTAVE Allegro: Improving the Information Security Risk Assessment 
Process. (SEI Report CMU/SEI -2007-TR-012). 
https://www.sei.cmu.edu/library/introducing-octave-allegro-improving-
the-information-security-risk-assessment-process/  
 
APPENDIX 
 

